Add a doc on chunk skipping indexes (#3449)
timescale/docs: use-timescale/hypertables/improve-query-performance.md

---
title: Improve query performance
excerpt: How and why to use chunk skipping to optimize hypertable performance
products: [cloud, mst, self_hosted]
keywords: [hypertables, indexes, chunks]
---

> # Improve query performance

Reviewer: This is only one of the ways to improve query performance.

@billy-the-fish @atovpeko If this makes sense to you as well, I think that we should have a whole section on how to "Improve query performance", with this page just being one of the many that we'll add.

Other candidates:
- Enable Compression - With information on how to setup compression correctly (especially segment_by, order_by and the differences between asc/desc options on the later). Also including information on our compression recommendations (also still missing from the docs I think @cevian?)
- Add more indexes - With information on indexes, but also how we add min/max sparse indexes on compressed chunks when we see an index on the main hypertable (more to come on this - we'll write a blog post soon that we'll be able to use)
- Add continuous aggregates - With an intro on why and how CAggs are useful and how to re-write queries to use them. 
  [Advanced] How and why setup hierarchical continuous aggregates
- [Advanced] Setting (and updating) the chunk size for hypertables
  [Even more advanced] Setting (and updating) the chunk size for Continuous Aggregates
- Fine tune policies - Not exactly related to query performance, but still pretty relevant
- _I bet there is something more that I may be forgetting right now.._ 

Now, back to this - this is about improving the performance of a very specific use case: queries that do not filter by a partitioning column.

Not sure what the best title could be, but the following sounds like too much (but maybe it's ok to get us started):
```suggestion
# Improve performance of queries that do not filter by a partitioning column
```

Author: You are very right in this :-) Iain suggested this page title to be "Improve query performance" because we plan on adding more optimization stuff in there - eventually making it into a section, I think. However, changing titles back and forth won't be good for SEO or doc user experience, that's why we put in this more general title from the very beginning.

Reviewer: What I  was thinking about was this one being just one of **multiple pages** under a larger section on the docs called "Improved Query Performance", not as a section on a larger page (cause it already feels like it has a lot and we can add way more following my comment above).

But if you think that the way to go is one page for all, I am not going to object - you know better about how to optimally structure our documentation!

Author: Yeah, I also meant making it into a section with multiple pages, not a section on the page. We'll get there :-) Thank you!

When you execute a query on a hypertable, you do not parse the whole table; you only access the chunks necessary
to satisfy the query. This works well when the `WHERE` clause of a query uses the column by which a hypertable is 
partitioned. For example, in a hypertable where every day of the year is a separate chunk, a query for September 1 
accesses only the chunk for that day. However, many queries use columns other than the partitioning one. For example, 
a table might have two columns: one for when data was gathered and one for when it was added to the database. If you 
partition by the date of gathering, a query by the date of adding accesses all chunks in the hypertable and slows the 
performance.

> 

Reviewer: Why be shy and not add the example and the diagrams from the [blog post](https://www.timescale.com/blog/boost-postgres-performance-by-7x-with-chunk-skipping-indexes/)? 

Same question for bellow on the "How chunk skipping works"

Author: Good point on diagrams, thank you. For examples, I was aiming at making this a very lean document (as tech docs should be). I also didn't want this to copy your blog post word for word, for SEO and other reasons. It seemed to me that having more examples would not make the point much clearer (again, because this is a tech document, rules are very different for tech marketing content). I can add more, of course, if you feel that having only one does not convey the point. I think it would be better though to just explicitly link to your blog post for an in-depth look.

Author: I made the example more specific, linked to your blog post, and added a diagram

To improve query performance, TimescaleDB enables you to skip hypertable chunks on non-partitioning columns. 

## How chunk skipping works

You enable chunk skipping on a column in a table. TimescaleDB tracks the minimum and maximum values for that column in 
each chunk. These ranges are stored in the start (inclusive) and end (exclusive) format in the `chunk_column_stats` 
catalog table. TimescaleDB uses these ranges for dynamic chunk exclusion when the `WHERE` clause of an SQL query 
specifies ranges on the column. 

You can enable chunk skipping on compressed hypertables for `smallint`, `int`, `bigint`, `serial`, `bigserial`, `date`,
`timestamp`, or `timestamptz` type columns. Best practice is to enable chunk skipping on the columns correlated to the 
partitioning column and referenced in the `WHERE` clauses. However, you can enable chunk skipping on as many columns as 
you need.

## Enable chunk skipping

To enable chunk skipping on a column, call `enable_chunk_skipping` on a `hypertable` for a `column_name`. For example, 
the following query enables chunk skipping on the `order_id` column in the `orders` table:

```sql
SELECT enable_chunk_skipping('orders', 'order_id');

> ```

Reviewer: We need to make it more explicit that this works only for compressed chunks. 

I just checked and realized that we are missing this info on the [api page](https://docs.timescale.com/api/latest/hypertable/enable_chunk_skipping/) as well - we talk about hypertables in general  at the top and just talk about compressed chunks as a side note at the end :-(

Author: Added a highlight to the main doc and emphasis in API docs

For more details, see the [API Reference][api-reference].

> 

Reviewer: I think that we are missing a section on when does this work?

Rough sketch (by copy pasting something from the blog post that may not make sense right now without the example): 

```suggestion

## When should you use chunk-skipping indexes?

So the question is when should you use chunk-skipping indexes and for which columns. 

This works best for columns that are related to the partitioning column in some way; they are correlated. To exemplify this correlation, let’s think of our earlier example of ending a job. A job’s end time follows its creation time, typically by seconds or minutes. Similarly, a satellite observation’s recording time on the database follows the actual observation time. Sequential IDs and the creation timestamp for the same entities also correlate (both increasing synchronously).
```

Author: Added, thank you.

performance.

To improve query performance, TimescaleDB enables you to skip chunks on non-partitioning columns in hypertables. 

<Highlight type="important">
Chunk skipping can only be enabled for **compressed** hypertables.
</Highlight>

## How chunk skipping works

You enable chunk skipping on a column in a table. TimescaleDB tracks the minimum and maximum values for that column in 
each chunk. These ranges are stored in the start (inclusive) and end (exclusive) format in the `chunk_column_stats` 
catalog table. TimescaleDB uses these ranges for dynamic chunk exclusion when the `WHERE` clause of an SQL query 
specifies ranges on the column. 

![Chunk skipping](https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/hypertable-with-chunk-skipping.png)

You can enable chunk skipping on compressed hypertables for `smallint`, `int`, `bigint`, `serial`, `bigserial`, `date`,
`timestamp`, or `timestamptz` type columns. 

## When to enable chunk skipping

> You can enable chunk skipping on as many columns as you need. However, best practice is to enable it on the following columns:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can enable chunk skipping on as many columns as you need. However, best practice is to enable it on columns that are both:
```

> - correlated, that is, related to the partitioning column in some way, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Correlated. That is, related to the partitioning column in some way
```

> - referenced in the `WHERE` clauses. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Referenced in the `WHERE` clauses. 
```
